Hi, so I'm a big football fan and I
really wanted to figure out who wins the
World Cup 2026. [music]
I actually tried this with the European
Cup before and my [music] model said
Spain. So at the end, Spain won. Still,
I want to try another approach this
[music] time. So my idea was this,
instead of just predicting who wins,
draws, or loses, I would predict the
actual scoreline of every single match
and [music] then play the whole
tournament 2,000 of times. Let me walk
through how this works. First, we need
data. For that, I'm using a data set
from Kaggle [music] with basically every
international match ever played. The
date, the teams, and the score. I
dropped everything before 1995. Then we
need to know how strong each team is.
For that, I use Elo. [music] Everyone
starts at 1,500 and after each match,
the winner takes points off the loser.
If you beat a much stronger opponent,
you gain a lot. Lose to a weaker one and
you drop a lot.
>> [music]
>> Big wins and important games count for
more. Run that through 30 years of
results and you get a rating for every
team. Now, the model itself. We turn the
Elo gap between [music] two teams into
expected goals. So we call it lambda.
The formula is lambda equals [music] E
to the power of mu plus beta times the
gap over 100. Those two numbers, mu and
beta, aren't guessed. They are learned
[music] from all that history. Mu is the
baseline, roughly the goals you would
expect in a totally even game. Beta
controls how strongly the gap tilts
[music] the score. So for Spain against
Congo, a gap of 400 gives us roughly 2.4
expected goals for Spain and about
[music] half a goal for Congo. From
those two numbers, we build a table of
every possible scoreline. Goals roughly
follow a Poisson distribution, so
[music] each team gets its own little
spread, how likely zero goals, one
goals, and so on are and we multiply
[music] them together. So Spain wins
about 80%, draw 50%, and Congo wins wins
about roughly 6% and the single most
likely [music] result is 2-0 for Spain.
Before trusting our model, we have to
test it on matches it had never seen. So
on average, it predicts about 2.05 goals
a [music] game, and the reality was
2.78. So, it's pretty well calibrated.
>> [music]
>> Let's now go into the demo where we can
simulate the tournament in a single run
with a bracket, or we can run it like
thousands of times to do a real Monte
Carlo simulation. [music]
If you want to play around with the
model yourself, then of course you can
clone the repository and just follow the
instructions in the readme to do
everything on your own. Okay, so I'm now
on localhost port 5103, and this is our
FIFA World Cup 2026 simulator. So, first
we have a look at how the Elo results
are built. So, this is every team that
qualified for the World Cup. As you can
see, currently on top, Spain, Argentina
behind it, France, England. I think this
is pretty reasonable.
So, this is the development of every
team.
And
now, what you can also do is to try and
predict a single match. Let's pick a
very strong team like Argentina, and put
that against
let's say Curacao. That should be
pretty clear. As you can see, Argentina
wins 88% of the time, 8% draw, 2%
Curacao wins. So, that is the
probability for each score. 0-0 gets
picked three times, 10 times 1-0, 15
times
2-0, and three times
3-0. So, based on that, we get the
probability of a win, draw, and win for
the other team. Let's in the next step
simulate a single run. So, in this case,
we can just pick single run.
Say how fast you want to play it. In
this case, we just make it
two times, or let's make it three times,
maybe. And then we simulate the
tournament. So, now we are in the group
stage. Here we can see all of the
predicted results.
So, this might take a few seconds. Now,
we are in the second
match day.
Something really surprising here.
Okay.
Germany wins at the end.
Always good to see is the German, of
course.
Okay, knockout phase. Germany wins
against USA.
France against Germany.
Croatia, Portugal.
That would be really nice, but I I never
>> [laughter]
>> I don't think that happens.
Okay.
Ah, too bad. England won. So, we've got
a new world champion, and that is
England.
So, that was of course only a single
run. In statistics, you will never
predict a single event, but you always
work with probabilities. So, we do the
exact simulation
a few times more. In this case, with the
Monte Carlo simulation.
And we can do something like this. We
can do it 10,000 times.
And here, update steps. So, this are the
numbers of simulation that run
at one time. Uh, let's make it 1,000 and
decrease it a bit, so we can see a
little bit
of variance.
So, here we are.
Every top position is one World Cup win.
Currently, Argentina is leading.
But, that changes a little bit.
So, we can see Spain and Argentina are
clearly favored.
But, Spain starts to lead.
Okay.
So, here you can see our top contenders
are clearly Spain, Argentina, France.
Little bit surprising, Colombia.
But, Brazil and Morocco and England are
not so unexpected for me.
So, here we are. After 1,000 runs.
Spain won about 250, Argentina 210. So,
I guess these are the top contenders for
the World Cup win, at least with my
model. After that, we've got France,
Colombia, Brazil, England, and so on.
Germany with only 2%,
but yeah, sometimes wonders happen, so
we never really know. But as always, let
me know in the comment who is your
favorite team in the World Cup and what
do you think about my model. Thank you
very much for watching. See you in the
next video. Bye-bye.